---
layout: page
title: 2021-08-26  
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Definition of functors

A functor $F: \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ is a 
- function $F : \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal C \to \operatorname{Ob} \mathcal D$ on objects and 
- for each $X, Y \in \mathcal C$ a function 
$$
    F_{X,Y} : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D}(FX,FY)
$$

which we will often also just write as $F$ using the context to disambiguiate. 

These are required to satisfy 
$$
    F( f \circ g ) = F(f) \circ F(g) 
$$
for any pair of morphisms $f,g$ and 
$$
    F(1_X) = 1_{FX}
$$

## Examples
 
- For any category $\mathcal C$, there is the identity function $\operatorname{Id} : \mathcal C \to \mathcal C$ 
which is the identity functor on objects and morphisms.
- Given a homomorphism $f : R \to S$ of rings, there is a _pushforward_ (or _restriction of scalars_) functor 
$$
    f_\ast : \operatorname{Mod} S \to \operatorname{Mod} R 
$$
which on the underlying abelian group is $f_\ast N := N$ with the $R$-action given by 
$$
    r \cdot n := f(r) n. 
$$
For a morphism of $\phi : N \to N^\prime$ in $\operatorname{Mod} S$, we set 
$$
    f_\ast \phi := \phi
$$
Let's quickly see that we have a module homomorphism 
$$
    f_\ast \phi( r \cdot n ) = \phi(f(r) n) = f(r) \phi(n) = r \cdot f_\ast \phi(n)
$$
where we can extract $f(r)$ since $\phi$ is assumed to be a $S$-module homomorphism. 

    Thus $f_\ast$ is well-defined and it is immediate that it preserves composition and identity maps. 

- Another important functor starts from a $R$-$S$ bimodule $P$. I claim that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-) : \operatorname{Mod} R \to \operatorname{Mod} S 
$$
is a well-defined functor. 

    First we need to give the set $\operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-)$ the structure a $S$-module. As an 
    abelian group, we set 
    $$
        (f+g)(p) := f(p) + f(p)
    $$  
    and for the $S$-module structure we let 
    $$
        s \cdot f(p) := f(ps).
    $$
    
    For morphisms, we take 
    $$
        \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,f)(\phi) := f \circ \phi. 
    $$

As the Hom-functor $\operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-)$ will be quite central to our investigation, let's work through 
a couple sub-examples. 

- Take $R = S = P$. This bimodule is usually called the _diagonal_ of $R$ and denoted by $\Delta_R$. We already 
saw that evaluation at $1$ is a bijection 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(\Delta,M) \overset{ev_1}{\to} M \\
    \phi \mapsto \phi(1) 
$$
for any $R$-module $M$. This is in fact an isomorphism of $R$-modules since 
$$
    (r \cdot \phi)(1) = \phi(r) = r \phi(1). 
$$
Thus, for each $M$, application of $\operatorname{Hom}_R(\Delta, M)$ is "naturally" isomorphic to $M$. We will 
make this precise in a moment. 

- Take $R = S = k[x]$ and $P = k[y,z]$ with the bimodule structure given by $x \mapsto y$ and $x \mapsto z$. To 
compute $\operatorname{Hom}_{k[x]}(k[y,z],-)$ we will write a presentation for $k[y,z]$ as a $k[x]$-module. 

    As $k[x]$-module, $k[y,z]$ has a infinite basis given by $z^i$ for $0 \leq i < \infty$. Since it is a free 
    module, 
    $$
        \operatorname{Hom}_{k[x]}(k[y,z],-) \cong \operatorname{Hom}_k(k[z],-).
    $$
    We can specify the $k[x]$-module homomorphism by providing a $k$-linear map from $k[z]$. Let's specialize to 
    $M = k[x]/(x) = k$. Then any linear map $k[z] \to k$ can be written as an infinite sum 
    $$
        \sum_{i = 0}^\infty a_j \delta_j 
    $$
    where 
    $$
        \delta_j (z^i) =
        \begin{cases}
            1 & j = i \\
            0 & \text{ else }
        \end{cases}
    $$
    The $k[x]$ module structure is given by $x \delta\_i = \delta\_{i-1}$ for $i > 0$ and $x \delta_0 = 0$. 

## Natural transformations

Given two functors $F,G : \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$, a _natural transformation_ $\nu : F \to G$ is a collection 
of morphisms 
$$
    \nu_X : FX \to GX
$$
for each object $X \in \mathcal C$. For any $f: X \to Y$ in $\mathcal C$, we require the diagram 
<center>
{% tikz nat_trans_diagram %}
    \node at (0,0) (FX) {$FX$};
    \node at (2,0) (FY) {$FY$};
    \node at (0,-2) (GX) {$GX$};
    \node at (2,-2) (GY) {$GY$};
    \draw[->] (FX) -- node[above] {$F(f)$} (FY);
    \draw[->] (FX) -- node[left] {$\nu_X$} (GX);
    \draw[->] (GX) -- node[below] {$G(f)$} (GY);
    \draw[->] (FY) -- node[right] {$\nu_Y$} (GY);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
commutes. 

## Examples

- If $F = G$, then we can take $\nu_X = 1_{FX}$. This is the identity natural transformation. 
- If $F = G = \operatorname{Id}$, then saying that $\nu: F \to G$ is a natural transformation is 
requiring that 
<center>
{% tikz nat_trans_center %}
    \node at (0,0) (X1) {$X$};
    \node at (2,0) (Y1) {$Y$};
    \node at (0,-2) (X2) {$X$};
    \node at (2,-2) (Y2) {$Y$};
    \draw[->] (X1) -- node[above] {$f$} (Y1);
    \draw[->] (X1) -- node[left] {$\nu_X$} (X2);
    \draw[->] (X2) -- node[below] {$f$} (Y2);
    \draw[->] (Y1) -- node[right] {$\nu_Y$} (Y2);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
is requiring that $\nu_X \circ f = f \circ \nu_Y$ for any morphism $f: X \to Y$. In particular, if 
$f : X \to X$, then $\nu_X$ must be in the center of $\operatorname{End}(X)$. 
- We have the free abelian group functor 
$$
    \mathbb{Z}^\bullet : \operatorname{Set} \to \operatorname{Ab}
$$
and the forgetful functor 
$$
    \operatorname{forget}: \operatorname{Ab} \to \operatorname{Set} \\
    A \mapsto A.
$$
There is a natural transformation 
$$
    \operatorname{Id} \to \operatorname{forget}(\mathbb{Z}^\bullet)
$$
given by 
$$
    \nu_U : U \to \mathbb{Z}^U \\
    u \mapsto e_u
$$
Indeed, since
$$
    \mathbb{Z}^f\left(\sum a_u e_u\right) := \sum a_u e_{f(u)}
$$
we see that for $f: U \to V$ 
$$
    \mathbb{Z}^f \circ \nu_U = e_{f(u)} = \nu_V \circ f.
$$
- Given an $R$-$S$ bimodule morphism $\psi : P \to Q$, we have a natural transformation 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(Q,-) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(P,-) \\
    \phi \mapsto \phi \circ \psi 
$$

## Functor categories

Using natural transformations, we can put functors into a category. (Remember the 
[Caution]({% link notes/2021_08_24.md %}#Caution)). The objects of 
$\operatorname{Func}(\mathcal C, \mathcal D)$ are functors $F : \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ 
while 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\operatorname{Func}(\mathcal C, \mathcal D)}(F,G) := 
    \lbrace \nu : F \to G \mid \nu \text{ a natural transformation } \rbrace
$$
Composition of natural transformation is given object-wise
$$
    (\nu \circ \mu)_X = \nu_X \circ \mu_X
$$
and the identity is the identity natural transformation. 

Each object of $\mathcal C$ gives two functors. 
$$
    h_X : \mathcal C to \operatorname{Set} \\
    Y \mapsto \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y)
$$
and 
$$
    h^X : \mathcal C^{op} \to \operatorname{Set} \\
    Y \mapsto \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(Y,X)
$$

A map $f : X \to X^\prime$ gives a natural transformation 
$$
    f : h_X \to h_X
$$
