---
layout: page
title: 2021-12-02
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Projective spaces as schemes

The primary example of a non-affine scheme is 
a projective space. We will describe the scheme 
and in the process obtain an understanding of its 
category of quasi-coherent sheaves. 

We start in general with a ($\mathbb{Z}$-) 
_graded ring_. 

**Definition**. A ring $R$ is $$\mathbb{Z}$$-graded 
if there is a decomposition of $R$ 
$$
R = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}}^{\infty} R_i
$$
as an abelian group such that 
$$
R_i R_j \subseteq R_{i+j}
$$
$R_i$ is called the i-th graded piece of $R$. An 
element $r \in R_i$ is _homogeneous of degree i_. 

We will often be concerned with case that $R_i = 0$ 
for $i > 0$. Here we will say that $R$ is 
$\mathbb{N}$-graded. In the $\mathbb{N}$-graded case, 
we have a canonical maximal ideal 
$$
R_+ := \bigoplus_{i > 0} R_i
$$
Often $R_+$ is called the _irrelevant ideal_. 

The primary example of a graded ring is the polynomial ring 
$k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]$ where we grade each $x_i$ 
as $a_i$ for some choice and extend multiplicatively.

The _standard grading_ is $a_i = 1$ for each $i$. 

A graded $R$-module $M$ is an $R$-module with 
$$
M = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} M_i
$$
such that 
$$
R_i M_j \subseteq M_{i+j}
$$

An ideal $I$ is _homogeneous_ if 
$$
I = \bigoplus_{i \in \mathbb{Z}} I \cap R_i 
$$
is a graded module. 

**Definition**. Let $R$ be a $\mathbb{N}$-graded 
ring. Then 
$$
\operatorname{Proj} R := 
\lbrace \mathfrak p \lneq R_+ \mid 
\mathfrak{p} \text{ is homogenous and prime} \rbrace 
$$
with the topology whose closed subsets are $V(J)$ 
for homogeneous $J$. 

For homogeneous elements $a \in R$, we have the 
corresponding principal opens $U_a$. 

Pick element $a \in R_i$ with $i > 0$. Then, we 
get a function 
$$
\begin{aligned}
U_a & \to \operatorname{Spec} (R_a)_0 \\
\mathfrak p & \mapsto (\mathfrak p R_a)_0 
\end{aligned}
$$

**Lemma**. This is well-defined and a homeomorphism. 

{% proof %}
The inverse is 
{% endproof %}

We equip $\operatorname{Proj} R$ with the sheaf of rings 
determined by 
$$
\mathcal O(U_a) := (R_a)_0 
$$
for positive degree $a$, plus restriction agreeing with 
localization as before. 

Given this, we see $\operatorname{Proj} R$ is a scheme. 

Next, for a graded $R$-module $M$, we get a quasi-coherent 
sheaf $\widetilde{M}$ by 
$$
\widetilde{M}(U_a) := (M_a)_0
$$

This produces an exact functor 
$$
\widetilde{(-)} : \operatorname{GrMod} R \to 
\operatorname{Qcoh} \operatorname{Proj} R
$$

### Projective space

Let's restriction attention to $R = k[x_0,\ldots,x_n]$ 
with the standard grading. 

Then, we have the principal opens 


