---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-02
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Representing functors by objects

We say a functor $F : \mathcal C^{op} \to \operatorname{Set}$ is _representable_ if 
there exists $X \in \mathcal C$ and a natural isomorphism $h^X \cong F$. 

Constructing a functor and then seeking representability is a basic technique in 
category theory. In general, you can dream up functors more freely than objects. 
Being the representable object then gives a strong understanding of how $X$ 
interacts with all objects in $\mathcal C$. 

## Examples

We will look at some common choices for $F$ and the construction of representing 
objects in $\operatorname{Set}, \operatorname{Mod-}R,$ and $R\operatorname{-Alg}$ where 
the last one is the category of $R$-algebras for a commutative ring $R$. 

- Let $\ast$ be a one-element set. We can make a functor 
$$
\begin{aligned}
    FX  & := \ast \\
    F(f) & := 1_{\ast}
\end{aligned}
$$
On its face this functor seems silly. If $h^X \cong F$, then we know that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(Y,X) = \ast
$$
for any $Y \in \mathcal C$. In other words, for any $Y$ there is a unique map 
$X \to Y$. We call such $X$ a _terminal object_ of $\mathcal C$ if it exists. 

In $\operatorname{Set}$, the terminal object is $\ast$. 

In $\operatorname{Mod-}R$, the terminal object is $0$.

In $R\operatorname{-Alg}$, the terminal object is $0$ as a $R$-algebra. 

- Assume we have a collection of objects $X_i \in \mathcal C$ indexed by a set $I$. 
Then, we can set 
$$
\begin{aligned}
    FX  & := \prod_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,X_i) \\
    F(f) & := \prod_{i \in I} \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(f,X_i)
\end{aligned}
$$
Here representing objects are called products and denoted by $\prod_{i \in I} X_i$. 

In $\operatorname{Set}$, $\prod_{i \in I} X_i$ is the Cartesian product. 

In $\operatorname{Mod-}R$, $\prod_{i \in I} M_i$ is the 
Cartesian product with component-wise addition and action of $R$.

In $R\operatorname{-Alg}$, $\prod_{i \in I} R_i$ is the 
Cartesian product with component-wise addition and multiplication and with 
$$
\begin{aligned}
    R & \to \prod_i R_i \\
    r & \mapsto \prod_i r
\end{aligned}
$$

- Let $I$ be a partially-ordered set. We can view $I$ as a category with 
$$
    \operatorname{Ob} I := I
$$
and 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_I(i,j) := 
    \begin{cases}
        \ast & i > j \\
        \empty & \text{ otherwise}
    \end{cases}
$$
Assume we have a functor $\phi : I \to \mathcal C$. This is the data of objects 
$X_i$ for $i \in I$ and maps $\phi_{ij} : X_i \to X_j$ if $i > j$ satisfying the 
condition that 
$$
    \phi_{ij} \phi_{jk} = \phi_{ik}
$$
Often this called a diagram of shape $I$ in $\mathcal C$. 

Recall the (inverse) limit of a diagram of sets $X_i$ is 
$$
    \operatorname{lim}_I X_i := \left\lbrace x \in \prod_{i \in I} X_i \mid \phi_{ij}(x_i) = x_j \right\rbrace
$$
Using this, for a general $I$-diagram in $\mathcal C$, we can consider
$$
\begin{aligned}
    FX := & \lim \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,X_i) \\
    Ff := & \lim \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(f,X_i)
\end{aligned}
$$

We already saw the construction of limits in $\operatorname{Set}$. In $\operatorname{Mod}-R$ and 
$R-\operatorname{Alg}$, the set-theoretic construction carries a natural structure of an $R$-module or 
an $R$-algebra. 

One particularly common diagram is 
<center>
{% tikz pushout_bullet %}
    \node (X) at (2,0) {$\bullet$};
    \node (Y) at (0,-2) {$\bullet$};
    \node (Z) at (2,-2) {$\bullet$};
    \draw[->] (X) -- (Z);
    \draw[->] (Y) -- (Z);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
The limit over this diagram is called the _fiber product_ or _pullback_ of the diagram. 

One might think that we can always reduce to an "underlying set-theoretic" construction for representing 
objects. This is not always the case. Beyond the fact that functors do not need to be representable, 
the representing object is not necessarily induced from the construction when we are able to forget down 
to sets. 

The opposite category of commutative rings is equivalent a category of topological spaces with extra structure 
and the product in this category does not forget to the set-theoretic product. 