---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-16
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Strong generation and saturation 

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal T$ be a triangulated 
category linear over a field $k$. We say $\mathcal T$ is 
_Ext-finite_ if for any pair of objects $X$ and $Y$ we 
have 
$$
\dim_k \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} \operatorname{Hom}(X,Y[j]) 
< \infty 
$$
An additive functor $H : \mathcal T \to \operatorname{Vect} k$ 
is _Ext-finite_ if for any object $X$ we have 
$$
\dim_k \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} H(X[j]) < \infty
$$

**Lemma**. Let $\mathcal T$ be an Ext-finite triangulated category 
and let $X$ and $Y$ be objects. Then there exists a triangle 
$$
	Z \to X \to X^\prime \to Z[1]
$$
where $Z \in \langle Y \rangle_0$ and $X \to X^\prime$ is 
$\langle Y \rangle_0$-ghost. 

{% proof %}
We introduce some notation. For 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}^\ast(Y,X) \otimes_k Y 
$$
we really mean 
$$
\bigoplus_{i=1}^d Y[n_i]
$$
where $d$ is the dimension of $\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(Y[j],X)$ 
and $n_1,\ldots,n_d$ are the homological degrees of a basis. 

This object is independent of the basis up to isomorphism. 

There is a natural evaluation map 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}^\ast(Y,X) \otimes_k Y \to X
$$
whose action of the factor $Y[n_i]$ is the corresponding map 
in the basis for $\bigoplus \operatorname{Hom}(Y[j],X)$. 

We set 
$$
Z = \operatorname{Hom}^\ast(Y,X) \otimes_k Y 
$$
and use the triangle 
$$
Z \to X \to X^\prime \to Z[1]
$$
where $X^\prime$ is the cone over $Z \to X$. 

By construction, any map $Y[l] \to X$ will lift to $Y[l] \to Z$. 
Just take the factor in $Z$ corresponding to $Y[l] \to X$. Then, 
the composition $Y[l] \to X \to X^\prime$ will be $0$. So 
$X \to X^\prime$ is $\langle Y \rangle_0$-ghost. 
{% endproof %}

Assume we have a cohomological functor $H : \mathcal T^{op} \to 
\operatorname{Vect} k$ which is Ext-finite. We want to employ the 
"resolution" procedure from Brown representability to $H$ with a 
single object (and its shifts) playing the role of the compact 
generators. 

We start with 
$$
X_0 := \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} H(G[j]) \otimes_k G[j]
$$
Since the summands of $X_0$ are indexed by elements $H(G[j])$, 
there is a natural element of $H(X_0)$ given by using the 
element from the index. From Yoneda, we get a natural 
transformation 
$$
\xi_0 : h^{X_0} \to H
$$

Inductively, we set 
$$
K_i(G[j]) := \ker\left( \xi_i(G[j]): \operatorname{Hom}(G[j],X_i) \to 
H(G[j]) \right)
$$
and 
$$
Y_i := \bigoplus_{j \in \mathbb{Z}} K_i(G[j]) \otimes_k G[j]
$$
We have natural map $Y_i \to X_i$ and we let 
$$
X_{i+1} = \operatorname{cone}(Y_i \to X_i)
$$

Note that from Ext-finiteness of $\mathcal T$ and $H$ all this 
constructions yield well-defined objects of $\mathcal T$. 

As in the proof of Brown Representability, we get a natural 
transformation 
$$
\xi_{i+1} : h^{X_i} \to H 
$$
such that the diagram 
{% eqn brown_redux %}
\begin{tikzcd}
h^{X_i} \ar[dd] \ar[dr] & \\
& H \\
h^{X_{i+1}} \ar[ur] 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commutes. 

Since we do not have anything beyond finite coproducts, we cannot 
pass to the homotopy colimit to achieve a representing object on 
the thick subcategory generated by $G$ so we need to prove that 
after finite number of steps we can do this. 

**Lemma**. On $\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0$, $H$ is isomorphic to a 
retract of $X_1$. 

{% proof %}
For any object $E \in \overline{\langle G \rangle}_0$, we 
have a commutative diagram 
{% eqn retract_H %}
\begin{tikzcd}
0 \ar[r] & \ker \xi_0(E) \ar[r] \ar[rd,"0"] & 
\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_0) \ar[r] \ar[d] & H(E)
\ar[d,"="] \ar[r] & 0 \\
& & \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_1) & H(E) \ar[r] & 0 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
where the diagonal map vanishes from the construction $X_1$. Thus, we 
get a map 
$$
H(E) \to \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_1) 
$$
which splits 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_1) \to H(E)
$$
This construction is natural in $E$. 
{% endproof %}

So on $\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0$, we have represented our 
object, at least allowing for retracts. To achieve this we needed that
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(S,X_i) \to H(X_i) \to 0
$$
is exact and the composition 
$$
\ker \xi_i(S) \to \operatorname{Hom}(S,X_i) \to 
\operatorname{Hom}(S,X_{i+1})
$$
is zero. 

We will show that we can achieve this for $\overline{\langle G 
\rangle}_n$ by composing a sequence of the maps $X_i \to X_{i+1}$. 

**Proposition**. On $\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n$, $H$ is 
isomorphic to a retract of $X_{n+1}$.

{% proof %}
We need to show that for any $E \in \overline{\langle G \rangle}_0$, 
the composition 
$$
\ker \xi_0(E) \to \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_0) \to 
\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_{n+1})
$$
is $0$ and map 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(E,X_{n+1}) \to H(E) 
$$
is surjective. Then, the same observation as in the previous lemma 
allows us to conclude that $H$ is isomorphic to a retract of $X_{n+1}$. 

We proceed by induction on $n$ with the base case of $n=0$ being 
covered above. Assume that for any $E \in 
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n$, we know that 
$$
\ker \xi_0(E) \to \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_{n+1})
$$
is $0$ and 
$$
\xi_{n+1}(E) : \operatorname{Hom}(E,X_{n+1}) \to H(E) 
$$
is surjective. 

Let $F \in \langle G \rangle_n$. Then, we have a triangle 
$$
	H \to F \to E \to H[1]
$$
with $H \in \langle G \rangle_0$ and $E \in \langle G \rangle_n$. 

Then, a diagram chase shows that 
$$
\ker \xi_{n+1}(H) \to \ker \xi_{n+1}(F) \to \ker \xi_{n+1}(H) 
$$
is exact and there is a surjective map 
$$
\ker \xi_{n+1}(H[1]) \to \operatorname{cok} \xi_{n+1}(F) 
$$

{% endproof %}
