---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-28
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Derived functors 

We have a way to derive an additive functor $F : \mathcal A \to \mathcal B$ between abelian 
categories. If we have enough K-injectives, then the right derived functor is 
$$
    \mathbf{R}F(X) := F(I_X)
$$
where $X \to I_X$ is a quasi-isomorphism with $I_X$ K-injective. 

Similarly, if we have enough K-projectives, then the left derived functor is 
$$
    \mathbf{L}F(X) := F(P_X)
$$
where $P_X \to X$ is a quasi-isomorphism with $P_X$ K-projective. 

These provide method, at least theoretically, to compute the derived functors: 
- Figure out an explicit resolution
- Apply $F$
- Compute homology. 

However, as with most mathematical objects, it is also desirable to have an 
abstract characterization of derived functors. 

Historically, there exists (at least) two such. 

**Definition**. (Verdier) The _right derived functor_ of an additive functor 
$F: \mathcal A \to \mathcal B$ is an exact functor 
$$
    \mathbf{R}F: D(\mathcal A) \to D(\mathcal B) 
$$
together with a natural transformation 
$$
    j_{\mathcal B} \circ F \to \mathbf{R}F \circ j_{\mathcal B} 
$$
such that for any other exact functor 
$$
    G : D(\mathcal A) \to D(\mathcal B) 
$$
and natural transformation
$$
    j_{\mathcal B} \circ F \to G \circ j_{\mathcal B} 
$$
there exists a unique natural transformation $\mathbf{R}F \to G$ making the 
diagram 
{% eqn verdier_rf %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    & \mathbf{R}F \circ j_{\mathcal A} \ar[dd] \\
    j_{\mathcal B} \circ F \ar[ru] \ar[rd] & \\
    & G \circ j_{\mathcal A}
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}

There is also a corresponding _left derived functor_. Here
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        j_{\mathcal A} : \mathcal A & \to D(\mathcal A) \\
        A & \mapsto A[0]
    \end{aligned}
$$
is the fully-faithful embedding. 

Thus, we can view Verdier's definition of $\mathbf{R}F$ as the "closest" 
extension of $F$ to a quasi-isomorphism preserving functor. 

Another definition, due to Deligne, has the advantage of formulating the existence 
$\mathbf{R}F(X)$ as a representability problem. Like most representability problems, 
if we make our category bigger we can solve it. 

Fix an object $X$ and note that the class of quasi-isomorphism $X \to X^\prime$ is 
filtered since we can complete 
{% eqn filtered_qism %}
\begin{tikzcd} 
    X \ar[r] \ar[d] & X^\prime \ar[d,dashed] \\
    X^{\prime \prime} \ar[r,dashed] & X^{\prime \prime \prime}
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}

**Definition**. (Deligne) Let $X$ be an object of $D(\mathcal A)$ then $\mathbf{R}F(X)$ is 
the object of $D(\mathcal B)$ that represents 
$$
    Y \mapsto \operatorname{colim}_{X \to X^\prime} \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D(\mathcal B)}(Y, FX^\prime )
$$