---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-11
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Strong generation and ghosts 

The proof of Brown Representability is a powerful way to 
construct a "resolution" in a triangulated category. We wish 
to be able to run it successfully without the condition on 
the existence of coproducts. 

It turns out that a good substitute for compact generation is 
the notion of _strong generation_. To define this, we need some 
intermediate notions.

**Defintion**. Let $\mathcal S$ be a subcategory of a triangulated 
category $\mathcal T$. We write $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$ for 
the smallest additive subcategory closed under shifts and containing 
the objects of $\mathcal S$. 

The smallest subcategory closed under retracts and containing 
$\mathcal S$ is denoted $\overline{\mathcal S}$. 

Given another subcategory $\mathcal S^\prime$, we write 
$\mathcal S \ast \mathcal S^\prime$ for the full subcategory 
consisting of objects $X$ of $\mathcal T$ for which there is 
triangle 
$$
	S \to X \to S^\prime \to S[1]
$$
with $S \in \mathcal S$ and $S^\prime \in \mathcal S^\prime$. 

For $n>1$, we set 
$$
\langle \mathcal S \rangle_n = \overline{\langle \mathcal S 
\rangle}_{n-1} \ast \overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_0
$$

We say that an object $G$ _strongly generates_ $\mathcal T$ if 
there is some $n$ with 
$$
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n = \mathcal T
$$

**Lemma**. The operation $\ast$ is associative. 

{% proof %}
A proof goes here. 
{% endproof %}

From this lemma we see that 
$$
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_n = \overline{\underbrace{n}
{\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0 \ast \cdots \ast 
\overline{\langle G \rangle}_0}}
$$

We turn another notion which we will see if related. 

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal S$ be a subcategory of $\mathcal T$. 
We say that a map $f: X \to Y$ is _$\mathcal S$-ghost_ if 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(S,f) = 0
$$
for all objects of $\mathcal S$.

**Example**. Take $R$, a ring, as an object of $D(\operatorname{Mod} 
R)$. Then, a map $f: C \to D$ is $R$-ghost if and only if the induced map 
$$
H^0(f) : H^0(C) \to H^0(D)
$$
is zero. 

**Lemma** (Ghost Lemma). Let $\mathcal S$ be a subcategory of 
a triangulated category $\mathcal T$. If $f_{i+1}: X_i \to X_{i+1}$ 
is a sequence of $\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghosts for 
$0 \leq i \leq n$, then the composition $f_n \circ \cdots \circ f_1$ 
is $overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_{n+1}$-ghost.

{% proof %}
We prove this via induction on $n$. The case of $n=0$ is clear. 

For the induction step, it suffices to prove that if $f: X \to Y$ is 
$\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_n$-ghost and $g: Y \to Z$ is 
$\langle \mathcal S \rangle_0$-ghost, then $gf$ is 
$\overline{\langle \mathcal S \rangle}_{n+1}$-ghost. 
{% endproof %}
