---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-23
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## The derived category 

**Definition**. The _derived category_ of an abelian category $\mathcal A$ is a category, 
denoted $D(\mathcal A)$, with a functor 
$$
    Q : Ch(\mathcal A) \to D(\mathcal A)
$$
which takes quasi-isomorphisms to isomorphisms and such that for any 
$F : Ch(\mathcal A) \to \mathcal C$ which also inverts quasi-isomorphisms 
there exists a unique (up to isomorphism) $\overline{F}: D(\mathcal A) 
\to \mathcal C$ such that 
{% eqn der_cat_univ %}
\begin{tikzcd}
    Ch(\mathcal A) \ar[dd,"Q"] \ar[dr,"F"] & \\
    & \mathcal C \\
    D(\mathcal A) \ar[ur,"\overline{F}"] & 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
commutes up to natural isomorphism. 

There are of course versions $D^\ast(\mathcal A)$ for $\ast \in \lbrace b, -, + \rbrace$. 

Suppressing set-theoretic concerns, $D(\mathcal A)$ always exists. 

**Definition**. A class of arrows $\mathcal O$ is called a (left) _Ore system_ if 
- $\mathcal O$ is closed under composition
- For $f: X \to Z$ in $\mathcal O$ and $X \to Y$, one can complete the diagram 
{% eqn ore_square %}
\begin{tikzcd} 
    X \ar[r] \ar[d,"f"] & Y \ar[d,"g",dashed] \\
    Z \ar[r,dashed] & U 
\end{tikzcd}
{% endeqn %}
with $g$ in $\mathcal O$.
- If $\alpha f = 0$ with $f$ in $\mathcal O$, then there is $g$ from $\mathcal O$ 
with $g \alpha = 0$. 

There is also a right Ore system where we reverse arrows. 

**Theorem**. Quasi-isomorphisms form both a left and right Ore system. Consequently, 
the localization of $Ch(\mathcal A)$ exists. 

Haiman has some [nice notes](https://math.berkeley.edu/~mhaiman/math256-fall13-spring14/cohomology-1_derived-cat.pdf) 
from his derived categories course that cover this. 

While existence is nice, to get a handle on the derived category, you need to be able 
to actually compute morphism spaces. 

**Definition**. We let K${}^\ast$-Proj/Inj be the full subcategory of K-Proj/Inj consisting of those complexes 
with {bounded, bounded above, bounded below} homology for $\ast \in \lbrace b, -, + \rbrace$.

**Theorem**. Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough projectives. Then 
$$
    D^b(\mathcal A) \cong K^b{\text -}Proj 
$$
and 
$$
    D^-(\mathcal A) \cong K^-{\text -}Proj.
$$
If, furthermore, $\mathcal A$ has countable coproducts, then 
$$
    D(\mathcal A) \cong K{\text -}Proj. 
$$

Assume that $\mathcal A$ has enough injectives. Then 
$$
    D^b(\mathcal A) \cong K^b{\text -}Inj 
$$
and 
$$
    D^+(\mathcal A) \cong K^-{\text -}Inj.
$$
If, furthermore, $\mathcal A$ has countable products, then 
$$
    D(\mathcal A) \cong K{\text -}Inj. 
$$

