---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-09
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Exactness and tensor/Hom

We have seen that each of $-\otimes_R M$, $\operatorname{Hom}_R(M,-)$, and $\operatorname{Hom}_R(-,M)$ is an 
additive functor. 

### Left exactness of &nbsp; $\operatorname{Hom}_R(M,-)$

This is almost tautological from the universal property of kernels. For a morphism $\phi : M \to N$, we 
know that 
$$
    0 \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(T,\ker \phi) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(T,M) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(T,N)
$$
is exact. In other words, we preserve kernels:
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(T,\ker \phi) \cong \ker \left( \operatorname{Hom}_R(T,M) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(T,N) \right)
$$

The same argument in a general abelian category shows that $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal A}(A,-)$ is left exact.

### Left exactness (in the opposite category) of &nbsp; $\operatorname{Hom}_R(-,M)$

In the other entry, we get a functor $\left( \operatorname{Mod} R \right)^{op} \to \operatorname{Ab}$. The opposite category 
$\left( \operatorname{Mod} R \right)^{op}$ has the structure of abelian category where we exchange kernels and cokernels. 

From the universal property of cokernels we know that 
$$
    \operatorname{Hom}_R(\operatorname{coker} \phi, T) \cong \ker \left( \operatorname{Hom}_R(N,T) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M,T) \right)
$$
Reversing the arrows, we see that $\operatorname{Hom}_R(-,M)$ takes the kernels in $\left( \operatorname{Mod} R \right)^{op}$ to 
kernels. 

Again, the same argument works in a general abelian category. 

### Right exactness of &nbsp; $- \otimes_R M$ 

Assume we have an exact sequence 
$$
    M \overset{\mu}{\to} N \overset{\nu}{\to} C \to 0
$$
in $\operatorname{Mod} R$. Then $C \cong M/N$. If we apply $- \otimes_R T$ we get 
$$
    M \otimes_R T \overset{\mu \otimes 1}{\to} N \otimes_R T \overset{\nu \otimes 1}{\to} C \otimes_R T \to 0 
$$
and we want to check exactness. 

We need to first check that each element of $C \otimes_R T$ is in the image of $N \otimes_R T$. Pick some element $\sum c_i \otimes t_i$. 
Since $N \to C$ is surjective, we can find $n_i$ with $n_i \mapsto c_i$ for each $i$. Then 
$$
    \sum n_i \otimes t_i \mapsto \sum c_i \otimes t_i.
$$

Assume we can construct a map $\lambda: C \otimes_R T \to (M \otimes_R T)/(N \otimes_R T)$ making the diagram 
<center>
{% tikz right_exact_tensor %}
    \node (MxT1) at (-4,0) {$M \otimes_R T$}; 
    \node (NxT1) at (0,0) {$N \otimes_R T$};
    \node (CxT1) at (4,0) {$C \otimes_R T$};
    \node (MxT2) at (-4,-2) {$M \otimes_R T$}; 
    \node (NxT2) at (0,-2) {$N \otimes_R T$};
    \node (CxT2) at (4,-2) {$(N \otimes_R T)/(M \otimes_R T)$};
    \draw[->] (MxT1) -- (NxT1);
    \draw[->] (NxT1) -- (CxT1);
    \draw[->] (MxT1) -- node[right] {$=$} (MxT2);
    \draw[->] (NxT1) -- node[right] {$=$} (NxT2);
    \draw[->] (CxT1) -- node[right] {$\lambda$} (CxT2);
    \draw[->] (MxT2) -- (NxT2);
    \draw[->] (NxT2) -- node[above] {$\pi$} (CxT2);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
where the arrows labelled with $=$ are the identity maps. Assume that we have some element $ x \in N \otimes_R T$ with 
$(\nu \otimes 1)(x) = 0$. Then, we also know that $\pi(x) = 0$. So there exists a $y \in M \otimes_R T$ with 
$(\mu \otimes 1)(y) = x$ giving exactness at $N \otimes_R T$.  

Now we turn to making $\lambda$ using the universal property of tensor products. Consider 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        C \times T & \to (N \otimes_R T)/(M \otimes_R T) \\
        (c,t) & \mapsto \overline{\tilde{c} \otimes t }
    \end{align ed}
$$
where $\tilde{c}$ is a choice of element of $N$ such that $\nu(\tilde{c}) = c$. We need to check this is well-defined and 
$R$-bilinear. Any other lift of $c$ is of the form $\tilde{c} + n$ for some $n \in N$. We have 
$$
    \overline{(\tilde{c} + n) \otimes t} = \overline{\tilde{c} \otimes t + n \otimes t} = \overline{\tilde{c} \otimes t}.
$$
Thus the function is well-defined. Since $\tilde{c}r$ is a lift of $cr$, we see that we have an $R$-bilinear function. 

Thus, we get a unique $\lambda : C \otimes_R T \to (N \otimes_R T)/(M \otimes_R T)$ with 
$$
    \lambda(c \otimes t) = \overline{\tilde{c} \otimes t}
$$
This gives us the desired diagram and finishes the argument. 