---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-09
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Brown Representability 

Existence of semi-orthogonal decompositions and if Serre functors 
strongly depending on representability of functors. It is useful to 
have strong general criteria for such. 

Here we will review a criteria for "large" categories: compactly 
generated triangulated categories. [Next]({% link notes/2021_11_11.md %}) 
we will cover one for "small" categories, often categories of 
compact objects in compactly generated triangulated categories. 

Recall that a functor $H: \mathcal T^{op} \to \operatorname{Ab}$ is 
_cohomological_ if for any triangle 
$$
    X \to Y \to Z \to X[1]
$$
the resulting sequence 
$$
    \cdots \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(X,W) \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(Y,W) 
    \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(Z,W) \rightarrow \operatorname{Hom}(X[1],W) 
    \rightarrow \cdots 
$$
is exact. 

We say that $H$ _takes coproducts to products_ if the natural map
$$
    H\left(\bigoplus X_a \right) \to \prod H(X_a) 
$$
is an isomorphism for any coproduct. 

**Theorem**. (Brown Representability) Let $\mathcal T$ be a compactly 
generated triangulated category and $H : \mathcal T^{op} \to \operatorname{Ab}$ 
a functor. Then $H$ is representable if and only if $H$ is cohomological and 
takes coproducts to products. 

{% proof %}
We have seen that representable functors must take triangles to long exact 
sequences and coproducts to products. So assume that $H$ is a cohomological 
functor which takes coproducts to products and let $\mathcal C$ be a 
set of compact generators. 

Set 
$$
	U_0 := \bigcup_{C \in \mathcal C} H(C)
$$
so each element is a pair $(C,u)$ with $C \in \mathcal C$ and $u \in H(C)$. 
Set 
$$
	X_0 := \bigoplus_{(C,u) \in U_0} C
$$
If we apply $H$ to $X_0$, we get 
$$
	H(X_0) = \prod_{U_0} H(C)
$$
We have the distinguished element $\xi_0 \in H(X_0)$ given by $u \in H(C)$ 
for the factor $(C,u)$. From Yoneda, we get a natural transformation 
$$
	\xi_0 : h^{X_0} \to H
$$

Now assume we have constructed $X_n$ and $\xi_n : h^{X_n} \to H$. We set 
$$
	U_n := \bigcup_{C \in \mathcal C} \operatorname{ker} 
	\left(\xi_n(C) : \operatorname{Hom}(C,X_n) \to H(C) \right)
$$
and set 
$$
	Y_n := \bigcup_{U_n} C
$$
Since each element of $U_n$ is a map $C \to X_n$, we get a map $Y_n \to X_n$. 
We let 
$$
	X_{n+1} := \operatorname{cone}(Y_n \to X_n) 
$$

We want to show that $\xi_n : h^{X_n} \to H$ comes via composition from some 
$\xi_{n+1} : h^{X_{n+1}} \to H$. If we apply $H$ to the triangle, we get 
$$
	\cdots \rightarrow H(Y_n) \rightarrow H(X_n) \rightarrow 
	H(X_{n+1}) \rightarrow \cdots 
$$
an exact sequence. 

The map 
$$
	H(X_n) \to H(Y_n) = \prod_{U_n} H(C) 
$$
takes $\xi_n$ the sequence whose map for 
{% endproof %}
