---
layout: page
title: 2021-09-07
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Abelian categories and Mod R

Let record some pleasant features of $\operatorname{Mod} R$ and their abstractions. 

## Enriched in Ab 

First, each morphism space $\operatorname{Hom}_{R}(M,N)$ is an abelian group under 
pointwise addition of functions 
$$
    (f+g)(m) := f(m) + g(m) 
$$

Composition is bilinear over the abelian group struture: 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        (f_1+f_2) \circ g & = f_1 \circ g + f_2 \circ g \\
        f \circ (g_1 + g_2) & = f \circ g_1 + f \circ g_2 
    \end{aligned}
$$

**Definition**. We say $\mathcal C$ is _enriched in Ab_ if $\operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y)$ 
has the structure of abelian group such composition in $\mathcal C$ is bilinear over the 
group structure. 

## Additive categories 

Next, in $\operatorname{Mod} R$, finite products and coproducts (including over $\empty$) 
both exist and the natural map 
$$
    \bigsqcup_{i=1}^t M_i \to \prod_{i=1}^t M_i 
$$
is an isomorphism. Both are the direct sum $\bigoplus M_i$. 

If we are in a category where this condition on finite coproducts/products is satsified we will 
use direct sum notation for the coproducts. 

**Definition**. We say that $\mathcal C$ is an _additive category_ if it is enriched in Ab and 
finite coproducts and products exist and coincide. 

A functor $F : \mathcal C \to \mathcal D$ is _additive_ if each 
$$
    F_{X,Y} : \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal C}(X,Y) \to \operatorname{Hom}_{\mathcal D}(FX,FY)
$$
is a group homomorphism and the natural map 
$$
    \begin{aligned}
        \bigoplus_{i=1}^t F X_i \to F \left(\ \bigoplus_{i=1}^t X_i \right)  
    \end{aligned}
$$
is an isomorphism.

## Kernels and cokernels 

Each morphism $\phi : M \to N$ in $\operatorname{Mod} R$ admits a kernel and cokernel. To characterize them via 
universal property, let us remember the following definitions.

**Definition**. Let $\delta_i : A_i \to A_{i+1}$ be a collection of morphisms of abelian groups for $- N < i < M$ 
(with the possibility that $N = \infty$ or $M = \infty$). 

We say that $(A_\bullet, \delta_\bullet)$ is a _complex_ if
$$
    \operatorname{im} \delta_i \subseteq \ker \delta_{i+1}
$$

The collection is _exact_ if 
$$
    \operatorname{im} \delta_i = \ker \delta_{i+1}
$$

In general, we can measure the failure of cohomology using the _cohomology groups_ of $(A_\bullet,\delta_\bullet)$:
$$
    H^i(A_\bullet,\delta_\bullet) := \frac{\ker \delta_i}{\operatorname{im} \delta_{i-1}}
$$

These definition are given for the moment in Ab but we will how to make sense them in an arbitrary abelian category 
momentarily. 

With this, we note that $\ker \phi$, for $\phi: M \to N$ of $R$-modules, fits into the exact sequence of abelian groups:
$$
    0 \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M^\prime, \ker \phi) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M^\prime,M) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M^\prime,N)
$$

Similarly, for the cokernel $\operatorname{cok} \phi$, we get an exact sequence 
$$
    0 \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(\operatorname{cok} \phi, M^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(N,M^\prime) \to \operatorname{Hom}_R(M,M^\prime)
$$

Each of these is characterizations is equivalent to a universal lifting/extension property. 

For the kernel, we have the diagram 
<center>
{% tikz kernel_lifting %}
    \node (T) at (0,0) {$M^\prime$};
    \node (M) at (0,-2) {$M$};
    \node (N) at (2,-2) {$N$};
    \node (ker) at (-2,-2) {$\ker \phi$};
    \draw[->] (T) -- node[left] {$\psi$} (M);
    \draw[->] (T) -- node[above right] {$0$} (N);
    \draw[->,dashed] (T) -- node[above left] {$\exists ! \tilde{\psi}$} (ker);
    \draw[->] (ker) -- (M);
    \draw[->] (M) -- (N);
{% endtikz %}
</center>
which expresses that we get a unique $\tilde{\psi}$ if the composition $M^\prime \to M \to N$ is $0$. In other words, we can lift 
map $\phi : M^\prime \to M$ uniquely over $\ker \phi \to M$ if and only if $\phi \circ \psi = 0$. 
