---
layout: page
title: 2021-11-23
parent: Notes
has_children: false
---

## Rapid tour through sheaves

Let $X$ be a topological space. We have a category 
$\operatorname{Opens}(X)$ whose objects are open subsets 
and 
$$
\operatorname{Hom}(U,V) 
= 
\begin{cases} 
    U \to V & U \subseteq V \\ 
    \emptyset & U \not \subseteq V 
\end{cases}
$$

**Definition**. Let $\mathcal C$ be a category. A _pre-sheaf 
valued in $\mathcal C$_ $\mathcal F$ on $X$ is a 
functor 
$$
    \mathcal F : \operatorname{Opens}(X)^{op} \to \mathcal C
$$
A morphisms of pre-sheaves is a natural transformation of 
the functors. 

We can unpack this as follows:
- For every open $U$ we have an object $\mathcal F(U)$ of 
$\mathcal C$. We can this _sections_ of $\mathcal F$ 
over $U$ and will also write this as $\Gamma(U,\mathcal F)$. 
- If $U \subseteq V$, we have a morphism
$$
    r_{VU} : \mathcal F(V) \to \mathcal F(U) 
$$
with $r_{UU} = 1\_{\mathcal F(U)}$. We usually call 
this map _restriction_ from $V$ to $U$ and is also often 
denoted by 
$$
r_{VU}(s) = s|_U
$$
- If $U \subseteq V \subseteq W$, the diagram 
{% eqn presheaf_diagram %}
\begin{tikzcd}
\mathcal F(W) \ar[rr,"r_{WV}"] \ar[rd,"r_{WU}"] & & 
\mathcal F(V) \ar[ld,"r_{VU}"] \\
& \mathcal F(U) & 
\end{tikzcd} 
{% endeqn %}
commutes. 

For a morphism $f : \mathcal F \to \mathcal G$ we have 
morphisms 
$$
    f(U) : \mathcal F(U) \to \mathcal G(U) 
$$
with the commutative diagrams 
{% eqn maps_presheaves %}
\begin{tikzcd}
 \mathcal F(V) \ar[r,"f(V)"] \ar[d] & \mathcal G(V) \ar[d] \\
 \mathcal F(U) \ar[r,"f(U)"] & \mathcal G(U)
\end{tikzcd}
for $U \subseteq V$.
{% endeqn %}

Generally, when we just say pre-sheaf without specifying the 
values, we will mean sets or abelian groups. 

**Examples**
- Take an object $C$ from $\mathcal C$, then we have the 
constant pre-sheaf $\underline{C}$
$$
\underline{C}(U) = C \\
r_{VU} = 1_C. 
$$

- Let $C_x$ be a set of objects of $\mathcal C$ indexed 
by $X$. We have the pre-sheaf 
$$
U \mapsto \prod_{x \in U} C_x
$$
where 
$$
r_{VU} : \prod_{x \in V} C_x \to \prod_{x \in U} C_x
$$
is the projection onto the components with $x \in U$. 

- We have the pre-sheaf of continuous functions 
$$
\mathcal O(U) = \lbrace f : X \to Y \mid f 
\text{ continuous} \rbrace
$$
with target $Y$. If $Y$ is a topological ring, then 
$\mathcal O$ is a pre-sheaf of rings. 

- Fix $x \in X$ and $C \in \mathcal C$. Assume 
that $\mathcal C$ has a terminal object $\ast$. Then we have 
$$
    i_{x \ast} \underline{C} (U) = 
    \begin{cases}
        C & x \in U \\
        \ast & x \not \in U. 
    \end{cases}
$$
This works, in particular, if $\mathcal C$ is an abelian category. 

**Definition**. A pre-sheaf $\mathcal F$ is a _sheaf_ if given an 
open cover $U_\alpha$ of $V$ and sections $s_\alpha \in 
\mathcal F(U_\alpha)$ satisfying 
$$
s_{\alpha}|_{U_\alpha \cap U_\beta} = s_{\beta}|_{U_\alpha \cap U_\beta}
$$
for all $\alpha, \beta$, there exists a unique $s \in 
\mathcal F(V)$ with 
$$
s|_{U_\alpha} = s_\alpha
$$
for all $\alpha$. 

Morphisms of sheaves are morphisms of the underlying pre-sheaves. 

We have a forgetful functor 
$$
    \operatorname{Sh}(X,\mathcal C) \to \operatorname{PreSh}(X,\mathcal C)
$$
which often has a left adjoint. To give a (somewhat) explicit 
description, we need an auxiliary notion. 

**Definition**. Let $x \in X$ and $\mathcal F$ a pre-sheaf on $X$ 
with values in $\mathcal C$. Then the _stalk_ of $\mathcal F$ at 
$x$ is 
$$
\mathcal F_x = \operatorname{colim}_{x \in U} \mathcal F(U)
$$

In general, this need not exist. For common targets, like 
$\operatorname{Ab}$, this is not an issue. 

Assume that $\mathcal C$ has small colimits. Then